Categories README
Copyright:     Copyright 2009 by mikel evins, all rights reserved
License:       Licensed under the Apache License, version 2.0
               See the accompanying file "License" for more information


Categories is an experimental object system that provides polymorphic
functions with multiple dispatch, user-defined structured data types,
optional single or multiple inheritance, and programmable
dispatch. 

The object system is language-neutral, with implementations provided
for R5RS Scheme, Gambit-C Scheme with Gambit-specific features, and
Clojure. There are small differences in the API and semantics from one
language host to another, especially with regard to the way that
assignment to object slots is treated. Additional host languages may
be supported in the future.

You can use Categories by loading it into one of the supported host
languages and writing code that uses Categories features. 

Although this release of Categories is a very young version, and not
in any sense production-ready, it is part of a larger
product-development process, and is intended eventually to be suitable
for use in production code. As the implementation evolves, preference
will naturally be given to those features and host platforms that are
in production use. Users of Categories will have the greatest
influence on how it evolves.


The released version of Categories is 0.2.1. The 0.3 drectory contains
some experimental work on additional features, but work on Categories
has stopped since I moved most of my efforts to the bard programming
language project proper, and to folio, a Common Lisp library that
provides some bard features.